Sync CNV runbook VirtualMachineStuckInUnhealthyState.md (Updated at 2025-08-24 08:16:18 +0000 UTC) (#321)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/openshift-virtualization-operator/VirtualMachineStuckInUnhealthyState.md

# VirtualMachineStuckInUnhealthyState

## Meaning

This alert fires when a VirtualMachine has been stuck in an unhealthy state
for more than 10 minutes and does not have an associated VMI
(VirtualMachineInstance).

The alert indicates that a VirtualMachine is experiencing early-stage
lifecycle issues before a VMI can be successfully created.
This typically occurs during the initial phases of VM startup when OpenShift
Virtualization
is trying to provision resources, pull images, or schedule the workload.

**Affected States:**
- `Provisioning` - Resources (DataVolumes, PVCs) are being prepared
- `Starting` - VM is attempting to start but no VMI exists yet
- `Terminating` - VM is being deleted but without an active VMI
- `Error` states - Various scheduling, image, or resource allocation errors

## Impact

- **Severity:** Warning
- **User Impact:** VMs cannot start or are stuck in error states

> - **Business Impact:** Workloads cannot be deployed, affecting application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Business Impact:** Workloads cannot be deployed, which affects application
```

  availability

> ## Possible Causes

Reviewer: Not sure if all the items in the lists need to be highlighted (because if everything is highlighted, nothing really is), but that's a minor niggle.

### Resource-Related Issues
- **Insufficient cluster resources** (CPU, memory, storage)
- **Missing or misconfigured storage classes**
- **PVC provisioning failures**
- **DataVolume creation/import failures**

### Image and Registry Issues
- **Container image pull failures** for containerDisk volumes
- **Registry authentication problems**
- **Network connectivity issues to image registries**
- **Missing or corrupted VM disk images**

### Scheduling and Node Issues
- **No schedulable nodes available** (all nodes cordoned/unschedulable)

> - **Insufficient resources** like KVM/GPU on available nodes or a
>   mismatch between requested and available CPU models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Insufficient resources** like KVM/GPU on available nodes
- **A mismatch betweenrequested and available CPU models**
```

```bash
# Discover the KubeVirt installation namespace
export NAMESPACE="$(oc get kubevirt -A -o custom-columns="":.metadata.namespace)"

# Check KubeVirt CR conditions (expect Available=True)
oc get kubevirt -n "$NAMESPACE" \
  -o jsonpath='{range .items[*].status.conditions[*]}{.type}={.status}{"\n"}{end}'

# Or check a single CR named 'kubevirt'
oc get kubevirt kubevirt -n "$NAMESPACE" \
  -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Available")].status}'

# Verify virt-controller is running
oc get pods -n "$NAMESPACE" \
  -l kubevirt.io=virt-controller

# Check virt-controller logs for errors
# Replace <virt-controller-pod> with a pod name from the list above
oc logs -n "$NAMESPACE" <virt-controller-pod>

# Verify virt-handler is running
oc get pods -n "$NAMESPACE" \
  -l kubevirt.io=virt-handler -o wide

# Check virt-handler logs for errors (daemonset uses per-node pods)
# Replace <virt-handler-pod> with a pod name from the list above
oc logs -n "$NAMESPACE" <virt-handler-pod>
```

### 5. Review VM Specification
Inspect the following details in the VM's spec to catch common
misconfigurations:

- Disks and volumes (in spec.template.spec.domain.devices and volumes):

>   - A bootable disk is defined using bootOrder: 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A bootable disk is defined using *bootOrder: 1*
```

  - Each disk name matches a volume name
  - Volume sources are valid: PVC, DataVolume, containerDisk, secret, or
    configMap

- Resources (in spec.template.spec.domain.resources):
  - Resource requests and limits are set and do not exceed node capacity

- Scheduling (in spec.template.spec):
  - nodeSelector, affinity, and tolerations are not overly restrictive

- Image pull configuration (in spec.template.spec.imagePullSecrets):
  - imagePullSecrets are configured if using a private image registry

- Power strategy (in spec.runStrategy or spec.running):
  - Only one of spec.runStrategy or spec.running is set, and it matches the
    desired behavior

## Mitigation

### Resource Issues

> 1. **Scale cluster** if insufficient resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Scale up the cluster** if the issue is insufficient resources
```

2. **Create missing storage classes** or configure default storage
3. **Resolve PVC/DataVolume failures**:
   ```bash
   oc get pvc -n <namespace>
   oc describe pvc <pvc-name> -n <namespace>
   ```

### Image Issues
1. **Verify image accessibility**:
   ```bash
   # Validate from the node
   oc debug node/<node-name> -it --image=busybox

   # Inside the debug pod, detect runtime and pull
   ps aux | grep -E "(containerd|dockerd|crio)"

   # For CRI-O/containerd clusters:
   crictl pull <image-name>

   # For Docker-based clusters (less common):
   docker pull <image-name>

   exit
   ```
2. **Configure image pull secrets** if needed:
   ```bash
   oc create secret docker-registry <secret-name> \
     --docker-server=<registry-url> \
     --docker-username=<username> \
     --docker-password=<password>
   ```

### Scheduling Issues
1. **Review VM scheduling constraints** and relax if too restrictive:
   - nodeSelector, affinity, and tolerations
   - Required CPU model, host devices, or features

> 2. **Verify node taints and tolerations** allow scheduling:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Verify that node taints and tolerations** allow scheduling:
```

   - Ensure the VM tolerates node taints that apply to target nodes

> 3. **Ensure nodes have required capabilities**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Ensure that nodes have required capabilities**:
```

   - KVM availability, CPU features, GPU, SR-IOV, or storage access

4. If nodes were intentionally cordoned for maintenance, **uncordon** when
   appropriate:
   ```bash
   oc uncordon <node-name>
   ```

### Configuration Issues Resolution

> 1. **Fix VM specification errors** based on oc describe output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Fix VM specification errors** based on the *oc describe* output:
```

  # If seeing "no volume provisioner" or similar errors,
  # specify a working storage class in VM spec:
  # spec.dataVolumeTemplates[].spec.pvc.storageClassName:
  #   <working-class>
  ```

## Prevention

1. **Resource Planning:**
   - Monitor cluster resource utilization
   - Set appropriate VM guest resources in the VM domain guest spec.
   - Plan storage capacity and provisioning

2. **Image Management:**
   - Use local image registries where possible to reduce
     latency
   - Configure DataVolume import methods appropriately:
     * **Pod import method**: Images pulled to temporary pods (default)
     * **Node import method**: Images pulled directly to nodes
       (requires pre-pulling)
   - Pre-pull critical containerDisk images to nodes only if
     using node import method

3. **Monitoring:**
   - Set up alerts for cluster resource exhaustion
   - Monitor storage provisioner health
   - Track VM startup success rates

4. **Testing:**
   - Validate VM templates in development environments
   - Test VM deployments after cluster changes
   - Regularly verify image accessibility

## Escalation

Escalate to the cluster administrator if:

> - Multiple VMs affected simultaneously (possible cluster-wide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Multiple VMs are affected simultaneously (possible cluster-wide
```

  issue)
- Issue persists after following resolution steps

> - Suspected OpenShift Virtualization component malfunction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A malfunction of an OpenShift Virtualization component is suspected
```

> - Unable to access system logs for further diagnosis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You are unable to access system logs for further diagnosis
```

> - You don't have enough permissions to run the diagnosis and/or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You do not have enough permissions to run the diagnosis or
```
